IAES International Journal of Artificial Intelligence (IJ-AI)  Vol. 14, No. 5, October 2025, pp. 4061~4073  ISSN: 2252-8938, DOI: 10.11591/ijai.v14.i5.pp4061-4073      4061    Journal homepage: http://ijai.iaescore.com  Design and analysis of reinforcement learning models for  automated penetration testing      Suresh Jaganathan1, Mrithula Kesavan Latha2, Krithika Dharanikota3  1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sri Sivasubramaniya Nadar College of Engineering, Chennai, India  2Software Development Analyst, Citicorp Services India Ltd, Chennai, India  3Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, United States      Article Info  ABSTRACT  Article history:  Received Jun 13, 2024  Revised Jul 26, 2025  Accepted Aug 6, 2025     Our paper proposes a framework to automate penetration testing by utilizing  reinforcement learning (RL) capabilities. The framework aims to identify  and prioritize vulnerable paths within a network by dynamically learning  and adapting strategies for vulnerability assessment by acquiring the  network data obtained from a comprehensive network scanner. The study  evaluates three RL algorithms: deep Q-network (DQN), deep deterministic  policy gradient (DDPG), and asynchronous episodic deep deterministic  policy gradient (AE-DDPG) in order to compare their effectiveness for this  task. DQN uses a learned model of the environment to make decisions and is  hence called model -based RL, while DDPG and AE -DDPG learn directly  from interactions with the network environment and are called model -free  RL. By dynamically adapting its strategies, the framework can identify and  focus on the most critical vulnerabilities within the network infrastructure.  Our work is to check how wel l the RL technique picked security  vulnerabilities. The identified vulnerable paths are tested using Metasploit,  which also confirmed the accuracy of the RL approach's results. The  tabulated findings show that RL promises to automate penetration testing  tasks.  Keywords:  Asynchronous episodic deep  deterministic policy gradient  Automated penetration testing  Deep deterministic policy  gradient  Deep Q-network  Reinforcement learning  This is an open access article under the CC BY-SA license.    Corresponding Author:  Suresh Jaganathan  Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sri Sivasubramaniya Nadar College of Engineering  Chennai, India  Email: sureshj@ssn.edu.in      1. INTRODUCTION  Penetration te

